Cancer is a disease of abnormal cell growth.
Normal cells stay in a balance
producing new cells as the old cells are dying.
But cancer cells multiply uncontrollably
and do not die at the same rate.
Chemotherapy drugs are used to kill cancer cells,
so they stop multiplying and die.
But unfortunately, even normal cells,
especially those that are fast growing,
can be affected by chemotherapy.
When fast growing normal cells die
faster than they should,
it can lead to side effects.
Damaging normal cells in the hair follicles for example,
causes hair loss.
Important blood cells can also be damaged.
Neutropenia, a low amount of a type of white blood cell,
can put patients at risk for infection.
Chemotherapy is scheduled with a
period of rest between cycles
to allow your body to recover from side effects
due to damage to normal cells.
The exact schedule your doctor develops
is based on many things,
including the drugs being used,
and the type of cancer you have.
There are planned breaks between treatment
to give normal healthy cells the chance to recover.
Despite these planned breaks,
sometimes people undergoing chemotherapy
need unplanned delays.
or must stop treatment because of side effects.
While these unplanned gaps in chemotherapy
treatment allow recovery from side effects,
they can also allow cancer cells to start growing again.
Side effects can affect your treatment plan.
Talk to your doctor about ways to manage them.